AGENTS.md (#5219)
firedrakeproject/firedrake: AGENTS.md

Reviewer: Mention in the AI contribution policy/contributing website?

Reviewer: And point this file to our policies/procedures.

# Firedrake

> Firedrake is an automated system for the solution of partial differential equations using the finite element method. The codebase is primarily Python, relying heavily on code generation and high-performance C/C++ backends to achieve scalability and speed.

Reviewer: Not C/C++

Author: ```suggestion
Firedrake is an automated system for the solution of partial differential equations using the finite element method. The codebase is primarily Python, relying heavily on code generation and high-performance C backends to achieve scalability and speed.
```

This file must be self-contained. Do not rely on linked Markdown files being read automatically. The essential repository guidance is embedded below.

## Project Architecture

Firedrake solves variational problems discretized with finite elements through a highly coordinated toolchain:

* **PETSc:** Firedrake relies on PETSc (specifically `DMPlex`) for scalable mesh management and parallel data distribution. PETSc/SNES/KSP are used extensively as the underlying linear and nonlinear solvers.
* **UFL (Unified Form Language):** Users symbolically specify their variational problems and forms using UFL.
* **TSFC (Two-Stage Form Compiler):** TSFC automatically generates highly optimized C-code to assemble the UFL integrals. It operates in two main stages:

> 1. **Translation to GEM:** TSFC translates UFL into the GEM tensor language. GEM represents expressions over quadrature points involving compile-time pre-tabulated basis functions provided by **FInAT** and **FIAT**.

Reviewer: "lower"

Author: ```suggestion
1. **Lowering to GEM:** TSFC lowers UFL into the GEM tensor language. GEM represents expressions over quadrature points involving compile-time pre-tabulated basis functions provided by **FInAT** and **FIAT**.
```

* **Generality Over Complexity:** Avoid increasing code complexity with complicated bookkeeping or special-case logic. Firedrake relies on the mathematical generality of finite elements.
* **Unified Abstractions:** Proper Firedrake code avoids branching on the wide range of discretizations (e.g., cell type, polynomial degree, or finite element family) or execution states (serial vs. MPI parallel). Rely on UFL, TSFC, PyOP2, and PETSc/DMPlex abstractions to handle these variations transparently.
* **Class Attributes:** All new attributes must be explicitly introduced and initialized in class constructors (`__init__`). Avoid dynamic attribute creation using `setattr` or retrieving uninitialized state with `getattr`.
* **Preserve Style:** Preserve Firedrake style and naming conventions. Keep edits minimal and local to the requested change. Match existing patterns in the package you are modifying.
* **Avoid Duplication:** Avoid unnecessary code duplication. Prefer reusing or extending nearby logic when it keeps behavior clear and local. Do not add speculative abstractions or broad refactors unless explicitly requested.

> ## Firedrake Coding Style And Conventions

Reviewer: New code should include type hints

* **No Python mesh loops:** The Firedrake style strictly avoids using Python `for` loops to iterate over degrees of freedom (DoFs) or cells in a mesh.
* **Prefer Code Generation/PETSc:** All mesh-level or DoF-level operations must be implemented using PyOP2-driven kernels or DMPlex operations. These should be accessed either through `petsc4py` or Firedrake's internal Cython wrappers.

> * **Restricted NumPy usage:** NumPy expressions and array manipulations are mainly allowed for index computations, small metadata configurations, or pre/post-processing outside the core execution loop. Do not use NumPy for heavy mesh-bound mathematical operations.

Reviewer: This isn't really true. We want to avoid touching whole arrays repeatedly. Otherwise numpy is good.

* **Docstrings:** All public-facing APIs must include properly formatted `numpydoc`-style docstrings.

> ## Testing Requirements

Author: Agents don't know how to use `mpi-pytest` we should probably teach them here.

* **Pull Requests:** All PRs must include comprehensive tests demonstrating that the new feature works or the bug is fixed.
* If behavior changes, update the relevant test blocks and ensure that parallel runs (MPI) yield correct and identical mathematical results to serial runs.

> * Keep tests targeted. Add or update the narrowest test that proves the behavior you changed.

Reviewer: And please don't create new test files

## Pull Request Expectations

* All changes are expected to arrive through GitHub Pull Requests.
* Keep diffs reviewable and focused.

> * Before concluding work, ensure `flake8` / `make lint` pass, and verify that the relevant subset of the pytest test suite succeeds locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Before concluding work, ensure `make srclint` passes, and verify that the relevant subset of the pytest test suite succeeds locally.
```

## Anti-Patterns (MUST avoid when writing or reviewing)

### Branching on Discretization or Execution State

WRONG — Writing manual `if/else` logic to handle specific element types, cell geometries, or parallel execution:

```python
# Anti-pattern: Special-casing mathematics instead of relying on abstractions
if mesh.ufl_cell().cellname() == "triangle":
    do_2d_logic()
elif mesh.ufl_cell().cellname() == "tetrahedron":
    do_3d_logic()

if mesh.comm.size > 1:

>     handle_parallel_communication()

Reviewer: Don't branch on rank either

```

RIGHT — Expressing the operation abstractly so the underlying toolchain (UFL/FIAT/PyOP2/PETSc) handles the dimensionality, element family, and MPI communication seamlessly.

### Dynamic attribute assignment outside constructors

WRONG — Dynamically attaching state to an object on the fly using `setattr` or direct assignment outside of `__init__`:

```python
class MeshProcessor:
    def process_mesh(self, mesh):
        # Anti-pattern: Adding attributes dynamically
        self.current_mesh = mesh

>         setattr(self, 'mesh_dimension', mesh.topological_dimension())

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        setattr(self, 'mesh_dimension', mesh.topological_dimension)
```

>         setattr(self, 'mesh_dimension', mesh.topological_dimension())

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        setattr(self, 'mesh_dimension', mesh.topological_dimension)
```

```

RIGHT — Initializing attributes in the constructor to establish a clear object schema:

```python
class MeshProcessor:
    def __init__(self):
        self.current_mesh = None
        self.mesh_dimension = None

    def process_mesh(self, mesh):
        self.current_mesh = mesh
        self.mesh_dimension = mesh.topological_dimension

```

### Relying on NumPy/SciPy for compute-heavy operations

WRONG — Using SciPy/NumPy to iterate over mesh coordinates or solve local cell matrices:

```python
# Anti-pattern: Pulling data into numpy to do heavy math over the mesh
coords = mesh.coordinates.dat.data_ro

> for i in range(coords.shape[0]):

Reviewer: not really a numpy issue, it's this loop

> for i in range(coords.shape[0]):

Reviewer: not really a numpy issue, it's this loop

* **Restricted NumPy usage:** NumPy expressions and array manipulations are mainly allowed for index computations, small metadata configurations, or pre/post-processing outside the core execution loop. Do not use NumPy for heavy mesh-bound mathematical operations.
* **Docstrings:** All public-facing APIs must include properly formatted `numpydoc`-style docstrings.

## Testing Requirements

* **Pull Requests:** All PRs must include comprehensive tests demonstrating that the new feature works or the bug is fixed.
* If behavior changes, update the relevant test blocks and ensure that parallel runs (MPI) yield correct and identical mathematical results to serial runs.
* Keep tests targeted. Add or update the narrowest test that proves the behavior you changed.

## Pull Request Expectations

* All changes are expected to arrive through GitHub Pull Requests.
* Keep diffs reviewable and focused.
* Before concluding work, ensure `flake8` / `make lint` pass, and verify that the relevant subset of the pytest test suite succeeds locally.
￼
Apply suggestion
￼
Add suggestion to batch

> ￼

Author: ```suggestion
```

```python
# Anti-pattern: Special-casing mathematics instead of relying on abstractions
if mesh.ufl_cell().cellname() == "triangle":
    do_2d_logic()
elif mesh.ufl_cell().cellname() == "tetrahedron":
    do_3d_logic()

if mesh.comm.size > 1:
    handle_parallel_communication()

```

RIGHT — Expressing the operation abstractly so the underlying toolchain (UFL/FIAT/PyOP2/PETSc) handles the dimensionality, element family, and MPI communication seamlessly.

### Dynamic attribute assignment outside constructors

WRONG — Dynamically attaching state to an object on the fly using `setattr` or direct assignment outside of `__init__`:

```python
class MeshProcessor:
    def process_mesh(self, mesh):
        # Anti-pattern: Adding attributes dynamically
        self.current_mesh = mesh
        setattr(self, 'mesh_dimension', mesh.topological_dimension())

```

RIGHT — Initializing attributes in the constructor to establish a clear object schema:

```python
class MeshProcessor:
    def __init__(self):
        self.current_mesh = None
        self.mesh_dimension = None

    def process_mesh(self, mesh):
        self.current_mesh = mesh

>         self.mesh_dimension = mesh.topological_dimension()

Author: ```suggestion
        self.mesh_dimension = mesh.topological_dimension
```

same call already works uniformly across both branches:

```python
# Anti-pattern: special-casing mathematics instead of relying on abstractions
def stable_timestep(mesh, velocity, cfl=0.5):
    if mesh.ufl_cell().cellname() == "triangle":
        h = CellDiameter(mesh)
    elif mesh.ufl_cell().cellname() == "tetrahedron":
        h = CellDiameter(mesh)
    else:
        raise NotImplementedError("Unsupported cell type")

    local_dt = assemble(cfl * h / velocity * dx)
    if mesh.comm.rank == 0:
        # Anti-pattern: a collective call reachable from only one rank deadlocks
        # every other rank waiting to enter the same reduction
        dt = mesh.comm.allreduce(local_dt, op=MPI.MIN)
    else:
        dt = local_dt
    return dt
```

RIGHT — `CellDiameter` is defined uniformly for every cell type, so the branch on `cellname()` does
nothing but duplicate the same call. And `allreduce` is collective: every rank must reach it
unconditionally, or the other ranks will block forever waiting for the missing rank(s):

```python
def stable_timestep(mesh, velocity, cfl=0.5):
    h = CellDiameter(mesh)
    local_dt = assemble(cfl * h / velocity * dx)

>     return mesh.comm.allreduce(local_dt, op=MPI.MIN)

Author: This is incorrect. assemble in this case returns a scalar, you need to interpolate this expression into DG0 to get the `local_dt` on each cell. The prefered method to get the min is 

```suggestion
    h = CellDiameter(mesh)
    DG0 = FunctionSpace(mesh, "DG", 0)
    local_dt = assemble(interpolate(cfl * h / velocity, DG0))
    with local_dt.dat.vec_ro as v:
        _, dt_min = v.min()
    return dt_min
```

Keep the `mesh.comm.allreduce` in the antipattern, but change the `interpolate` there.

    if mesh.ufl_cell().cellname() == "triangle":
        h = CellDiameter(mesh)
    elif mesh.ufl_cell().cellname() == "tetrahedron":
        h = CellDiameter(mesh)
    else:
        raise NotImplementedError("Unsupported cell type")

    DG0 = FunctionSpace(mesh, "DG", 0)
    dt_field = assemble(interpolate(cfl * h / velocity, DG0))
    local_dt = dt_field.dat.data_ro.min()
    if mesh.comm.rank == 0:
        # Anti-pattern: a collective call reachable from only one rank deadlocks
        # every other rank waiting to enter the same reduction
        dt = mesh.comm.allreduce(local_dt, op=MPI.MIN)
    else:
        dt = local_dt
    return dt
```

RIGHT — `CellDiameter` is defined uniformly for every cell type, so the branch on `cellname()` does
nothing but duplicate the same call. And a hand-rolled reduction guarded by `mesh.comm.rank` is both
redundant and a deadlock hazard: every rank must reach a collective call unconditionally, so prefer a
form of reduction that is inherently collective and called by every rank, such as a PETSc `Vec`'s own
`min()` (note also that `assemble(expr * dx)` integrates over the whole domain and returns a single

> scalar; `stable_timestep` needs a per-cell value, which requires `interpolate` into a `DG0` space):

Author: You used another very common antipattern that we should include as a core working rule. When correcting code that was wrong, do not add very verbose comments that refer to the wrong code that was removed, rather keep documentation focused on the actual code and the correct approach

# Firedrake

Firedrake is an automated system for the portable solution of partial differential equations using
the finite element method (FEM). The codebase is primarily Python, relying heavily on code generation
and high-performance C backends to achieve scalability and speed.

> This file must be self-contained. Do not rely on linked Markdown files being read automatically. The

Reviewer: We immediately break this, no?

Author: I deleted the sentence, I don't understand why PETSc had it.

essential repository guidance is embedded below. Firedrake's full contribution process is documented
at [Contributing to Firedrake](https://firedrakeproject.org/contribute.html); contributions assisted by
AI tools are welcome but subject to additional requirements described in the
[AI contribution policy](https://github.com/firedrakeproject/firedrake/wiki/AI-contribution-policy).

## Project Architecture

Firedrake solves variational problems discretized with finite elements through a coordinated
toolchain:

* **PETSc:** Firedrake relies on PETSc (specifically `DMPlex`) for scalable mesh management and

>   parallel data distribution. PETSc/SNES/KSP are used extensively as the underlying linear and

Reviewer: PETSc/SNES/KSP?

Reviewer: We also use PC an awful lot too.

  the UFL integrals, in two stages:
  1. **Lowering to GEM:** TSFC lowers UFL into the GEM tensor language. GEM represents expressions over
     quadrature points involving compile-time pre-tabulated basis functions provided by **FInAT** and
     **FIAT**.
  2. **Lowering to Loopy:** The GEM expressions are then lowered into **loopy** kernels.
* **PyOP2:** Finally, the generated loopy kernels are wrapped and executed by PyOP2, which handles the
  parallel execution of loops over mesh cells and facets.

## Core Working Rules

* **Mathematical Root Causes:** Bug fixes must address the underlying core mathematical or
  architectural issue. Do not merely patch particular failing test cases or edge cases.
* **Generality Over Complexity:** Avoid increasing code complexity with complicated bookkeeping or
  special-case logic. Firedrake relies on the mathematical generality of finite elements.
* **Unified Abstractions:** Proper Firedrake code avoids branching on the wide range of discretizations
  (e.g., cell type, polynomial degree, or finite element family) or execution states (serial vs. MPI

>   parallel). Rely on UFL, TSFC, PyOP2, and PETSc/DMPlex abstractions to handle these variations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  parallel). Rely on UFL, TSFC, PyOP2, and PETSc abstractions to handle these variations
```

  is what defeats NumPy's own performance model, on top of bypassing PyOP2/code-generation for
  mesh-bound data.
* **Docstrings:** All public-facing APIs must include properly formatted `numpydoc`-style docstrings.
* **Type Hints:** New code should include type hints on function/method signatures.

## Testing Requirements

* **Pull Requests:** All PRs must include comprehensive tests demonstrating that the new feature works
  or the bug is fixed.
* If behavior changes, update the relevant test blocks and ensure that parallel runs (MPI) yield
  correct and identical mathematical results to serial runs.
* Keep tests targeted. Add or update the narrowest test that proves the behavior you changed.
* Do not create new test files for this. Add the new test(s) to the existing test file(s) that already
  cover the feature or module being changed.

## Pull Request Expectations

* All changes are expected to arrive through GitHub Pull Requests.
* Keep diffs reviewable and focused.
* Before concluding work, ensure `make srclint` passes, and verify that the relevant subset of the
  pytest test suite succeeds locally.

## Development Toolchain

### Environment Setup

> * **Editable installs across the stack:** A bug can live in Firedrake or in any of its component

Reviewer: We should surely just point to the install documentation. This will bitrot immediately.

  packages (PETSc, petsc4py, UFL, FIAT, FInAT, TSFC, PyOP2, loopy). Install the relevant components
  with `pip install --no-build-isolation -e .` so that source edits in any layer take effect without
  reinstalling, and check which branch/commit of each component is actually active before assuming a
  fix belongs in Firedrake itself.
* **`petsc4py`/PETSc version skew:** `petsc4py` is a compiled extension built against one specific
  PETSc checkout. If you switch the PETSc branch/commit underneath an existing venv (e.g. to bisect a
  PETSc-side issue) without rebuilding `petsc4py` against it, `import firedrake` fails with a confusing
  `undefined symbol: ...` error from `petsc4py`'s `.so` — not a Firedrake traceback, and easy to
  misattribute to whatever you were just changing. Rebuild `petsc4py` (and re-run
  `pip install --no-build-isolation -e .` for it) after switching PETSc, rather than debugging the
  symptom.
* **Caching:** Generated TSFC kernels and compiled PyOP2 code are cached on disk

>   (`FIREDRAKE_TSFC_KERNEL_CACHE_DIR`, `PYOP2_CACHE_DIR`). If a code-generation change does not seem to

Reviewer: The environment variables aren't commonly used

  produces one nested pytest report per test. To instead run every `nprocs=3` test in `test_foo.py`
  together, directly under a single outer `mpiexec`, filter on the `parallel[match]` marker that the
  plugin attaches to tests whose `nprocs` equals the launched communicator size:
  ```bash
  mpiexec -n 3 python -m pytest -m "parallel[match]" test_foo.py
  ```
  Tests requiring a different `nprocs` are collected but skipped (not run) by this invocation; do not
  conclude a parallel code path is untested just because a plain, unmarked `pytest` run was green.
* **Splitting for CI:** `firedrake-run-split-tests` shards the suite by process count for CI; look at
  it (and `.github/workflows/pr.yml`/`core.yml`) if a failure only reproduces in CI and not locally.
* **Narrow reproduction first:** Run the single failing test node (`pytest path::test_name -k ...`)
  before the full module; the suite is large and full-module reruns are slow to iterate against.

### Debugging

* **Generated kernels:** Set `PYOP2_DEBUG=1` to compile generated C with `-O0 -g` instead of the
  optimized default, which makes the generated kernel debuggable with `gdb`/`cgdb` (attach to the

>   Python process, or run `gdb --args python script.py` and break in the generated function by name).

Reviewer: >  and break in the generated function by name

no idea what this means

> * **Cross-rank code-generation mismatches:** If a parallel run raises `CompilationError: Generated code

Reviewer: This is a very rare bug, not sure we need to tell the AI

Author: I had AI hit this bug, it happened when generating MG transfer kernels that were inserting different numeric values across ranks. AI struggled a lot to fix it, so in the end I manually did it. Maybe we should explain what the fix was for that case: https://github.com/firedrakeproject/firedrake/pull/5215/changes#diff-498499d2ded5133db5127b80d9d677146d1d1ba01a9ed67d80442a575ac08186R216

Author: ```
max_children = max((len(c) for c in children), default=0)
max_children = mesh.comm.allreduce(max_children, MPI.MAX)
```
The second line was missing

  differs across ranks`, the mismatching per-rank source is dumped under
  `<cache_dir>/mismatching-kernels/src-rank*.c` for a `diff` — do not try to reason about this class of
  bug from the Python traceback alone.
* **Parallel deadlocks:** `PYOP2_SPMD_STRICT=1` adds barriers around calls marked `@collective` and
  around cache access, trading overhead for a much narrower failure point when ranks disagree about
  control flow.
* **Logging:** `firedrake.logging.set_log_level()` (or the `PYOP2_LOG_LEVEL` environment variable)
  raises verbosity of Firedrake's/PyOP2's own logger, independent of PETSc's `-log_view`/`-info`.
* **PETSc-level diagnostics:** Since the linear/nonlinear solve ultimately runs through petsc4py,
  standard PETSc options (`-ksp_view`, `-snes_view`, `-ksp_monitor`, `-log_view`, `-start_in_debugger`)
  can be passed through Firedrake's `solver_parameters` or the command line exactly as in a plain PETSc
  application.

### Reproducible Environments

> * **Docker:** `docker/Dockerfile.firedrake` and `docker/Dockerfile.vanilla` define the images CI builds

Reviewer: Why not use the built images? Weird to point at the dockerfiles

  ```
  Tests requiring a different `nprocs` are collected but skipped (not run) by this invocation; do not
  conclude a parallel code path is untested just because a plain, unmarked `pytest` run was green.
* **Splitting for CI:** `firedrake-run-split-tests` shards the suite by process count for CI; look at
  it (and `.github/workflows/pr.yml`/`core.yml`) if a failure only reproduces in CI and not locally.
* **Narrow reproduction first:** Run the single failing test node (`pytest path::test_name -k ...`)
  before the full module; the suite is large and full-module reruns are slow to iterate against.

### Debugging

* **Generated kernels:** Set `PYOP2_DEBUG=1` to compile generated C with `-O0 -g` instead of the
  optimized default, which makes the generated kernel debuggable with `gdb`/`cgdb` (attach to the
  Python process, or run `gdb --args python script.py` and break in the generated function by name).
* **Cross-rank code-generation mismatches:** If a parallel run raises `CompilationError: Generated code
  differs across ranks`, the mismatching per-rank source is dumped under
  `<cache_dir>/mismatching-kernels/src-rank*.c` for a `diff` — do not try to reason about this class of

>   bug from the Python traceback alone.

Author: Mention what are the next steps after looking at the diff: globalize the parameters/logic in the code generation

# Firedrake

Firedrake is an automated system for the portable solution of partial differential equations using
the finite element method (FEM). The codebase is primarily Python, relying heavily on code generation
and high-performance C backends to achieve scalability and speed.

This file must be self-contained. Do not rely on linked Markdown files being read automatically; the

> essential guidance below must not require following a link to be actionable. Firedrake's full

Author: move this sentence into a new paragraph after this one

> contribution process is documented at

Author: ```suggestion
Firedrake's full contribution process is documented at
```

[Contributing to Firedrake](https://firedrakeproject.org/contribute.html). In short, for AI-assisted
contributions: declare that AI was used and which tool; a human must lead the PR, understand every
change, and answer reviewer questions themselves rather than relaying them to the AI; the code must
have been run locally to confirm it works; and AI should not be used to close issues labelled
'good first issue'. The full, authoritative conditions are in the
[AI contribution policy](https://github.com/firedrakeproject/firedrake/wiki/AI-contribution-policy).

## Project Architecture

Firedrake solves variational problems discretized with finite elements through a coordinated
toolchain:

* **PETSc:** Firedrake relies on PETSc (specifically `DMPlex`) for scalable mesh management and

>   parallel data distribution. PETSc's `PC`/`SNES`/`KSP` are used extensively as the underlying

Author: ```suggestion
  parallel data distribution. PETSc's `PC`/`KSP`/`SNES` are used extensively as the underlying
```

>   preconditioners and linear/nonlinear solvers.

Author: ```suggestion
  preconditioners and linear/nonlinear solvers, respectively.
```

# Firedrake

Firedrake is an automated system for the solution of partial differential equations using the finite element method. The codebase is primarily Python, relying heavily on code generation and high-performance C/C++ backends to achieve scalability and speed.

This file must be self-contained. Do not rely on linked Markdown files being read automatically. The essential repository guidance is embedded below.

> ## Architecture and Problem Solving

Author: ```suggestion
## Project Architecture
```

## Firedrake Coding Style And Conventions

* **No Python mesh loops:** The Firedrake style strictly avoids using Python `for` loops to iterate over degrees of freedom (DoFs) or cells in a mesh.
* **Prefer Code Generation/PETSc:** All mesh-level or DoF-level operations must be implemented using PyOP2-driven kernels or DMPlex operations. These should be accessed either through `petsc4py` or Firedrake's internal Cython wrappers.
* **Restricted NumPy usage:** NumPy expressions and array manipulations are mainly allowed for index computations, small metadata configurations, or pre/post-processing outside the core execution loop. Do not use NumPy for heavy mesh-bound mathematical operations.
* **Docstrings:** All public-facing APIs must include properly formatted `numpydoc`-style docstrings.

## Testing Requirements

* **Pull Requests:** All PRs must include comprehensive tests demonstrating that the new feature works or the bug is fixed.
* If behavior changes, update the relevant test blocks and ensure that parallel runs (MPI) yield correct and identical mathematical results to serial runs.
* Keep tests targeted. Add or update the narrowest test that proves the behavior you changed.

> ## Merge Request Expectations

Author: ```suggestion
## Pull Request Expectations
```

* All changes are expected to arrive through GitHub Pull Requests.
* Keep diffs reviewable and focused.

> * Before concluding work, ensure `flake8` / `black` (or the currently enforced Python linters) pass, and verify that the pytest test suite succeeds locally.

Author: ```suggestion
* Before concluding work, ensure `flake8` / `make lint` pass, and verify that the relevant subset of the pytest test suite succeeds locally.
```
